---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 6: KEY"
date:   2024-11-10
assigned: 2024-11-04
due: 2024-11-10
categories: activities xml keys
canvas-link: https://umich.instructure.com/courses/698670/assignments/2472584
published: false
---

This page contains the information for *{{ page.title }}*.

## Lab Questions & Suggested Responses

1. What is the first-line string that declares an XML document (that is, what is basic syntax of the XML document declaration)?

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
```

2. What is the advantage of aliasing a library? Why import the ElementTree module using `import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET` rather than the basic import statement?

Using an "alias" or abbreviation for a library makes it easier to refer to the library later with a shorter reference.
In the case of the ETree module, for example, if you do not alias it, every command
must be preceded by `xml.etree.ElementTree` (thus, `xml.etree.ElementTree.parse()`).
In contrast, when aliased to `ET`, you can call this function with `ET.parse()`.

3. Write a code block that loads the EAD finding aid in the course repo (`/data/xml/day_20221004_205435_UTC__ead.xml`). Parse the tree and extract the `archdesc` element. What are the subelements? This builds on the assignment we used in class (`control = root.find('ead:control')`) and then you can develop a loop, like `for element in archdesc` to explore further. (See the section in class exploring the `control` element.)

This code is similar to some in the [demonstration notebook][worked-notebook] and is only provided for illustration. You may develop other ways to approach this question.

```python
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET

# note this way of opening the file assumes the structure in the sample data files repository
# you may need to modify the path according to your file strucutre and operating system
ead_file = os.path.join('../data/xml/day_20221004_205435_UTC__ead.xml')

# parse the XML
tree = ET.parse(ead_file)
root = tree.getroot()

# establish the namespace dictionary
ns = {
    'ead':'http://ead3.archivists.org/schema/'
}

archdesc = tree.find('ead:archdesc', ns)

# print the subelements
for element in archdesc:
    print(element.tag)


```

4. How do you work with prefixed namespaces in the ET module? How do you assign prefixes for use within path addresses? How do you assign namespaces for writing out a valid XML with namespace declarations and prefixes?

In the ET module, you can assign prefixes and scheme URIs using a dictionary.
The dictionary can be inserted in many of the ET functions and will assist in substituting
the full URI for the shortened alias; in the ET module, and in XML syntax,
these full `URI-namespace+XML-tag` designations are called QNames or Qualified Names.

## Resources

* [XML Intro to Basic Functions notebook from course GitHub][worked-notebook]
* [Assignment page on Canvas]({{ page.canvas-link }})

[worked-notebook]: https://github.com/morskyjezek/si676-2024-data/blob/main/examples/xml-intro-basic-functions-ET.ipynb
