---
layout: post
title:  "Lab 1: KEY"
date:   2025-08-29
assigned: 2024-08-29
due: 2024-09-04
categories: activities regex keys
lab-slides: 
published: false
---

The lab asked you to answer the below questions using the text of this XML document: [https://lccn.loc.gov/2016959361/marcxml][regex-example] - and answer the questions below using regular expressions:

## Solutions

### Question 1. How many subfield entries are there?

**Answer:** There are 92 tags with the name `<subfield>`.
You can identify them by the markup convention, where each XML tag is
designated by an opening bracket: `<tag-name>`.

*Expression:*

```regex
<subfield
```

*Advanced expression* (matches on `<subfield></subfield>` tags and selects the content of the tags in a group that you could use for another purpose):

```regex
<subfield.*>(.*)<\/
```

### Question 2. How could you find ISO-8601 formatted dates with a regular expression?

**Answer:** An ISO-8601 date follows the pattern `YYYY-MM-DD`. 
In the sample document, there are five matches

There are multiple possibilities, but these are the two discussed in class:

```regex
\d\d\d\d\-\d\d\-\d\d
```

_This solution uses the `\` to escape `-`, which is a reserved character in some regex match engines:_

```regex
[0-9]{4}\-[0-9]{2}\-[0-9]{2}
```

_The regex match in VSCode does not require an escape for the `-` character,
so you can use a simplified expression:_

```regex
[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2}
```

### Question 3. How would you find an ISBN number? Are there any ISBN numbers?

**Answer:** An ISBN number is a 10- or 13-digit number that always begins with the digits 978. Sometimes hyphens are included in the number format to make it easier to read, but not always. So, the solution below looks for possible hyphens but also matches when there are no hyphens.

There is one ISBN number in the document.

*Expression:*

```regex
978\-?\d{7,10}
```

### Question 4. How many occurrences of computer (singular, plural, upper-lower)?

**Answer:** There are ten (10) matches; two are all lowercase, five in title case (one uppercase and the rest lowercase); and three all uppercase. The last three (uppercase) are plural.

_Expression to look for lowercase and titlecase:_

```regex
[Cc]omputers?
```

_Designate this expression case insensitive to match all occurences (the below solution uses the `/i` notation as used in the LibraryCarpentry explanation of regex):_

```regex
/computers?/i
```

Other solutions may exist. The above searches for an uppercase or lowercase letter `c`,
the string for computer, then uses the `?` quantifier to match zero or one occurences of the letter `s`.

### Question 5. Are there any web addresses in the text? How many?

**Answer:** Yes. There are two addresses that begin with `http`.

_Expression:_

```regex
https?
```

### Question 6. Can you isolate the domains and protocol designations of the web addresses? (That is, are they http? https? Are they www? Another? .com? .gov? etc)

```regex
(https?):\/\/(.*)\.(.*)\/(.*)\"
```

Note the above uses the "ungreedy" flavor of regex
(at regex101.com this is selected using the flag `/U`), which means that
the expression matches only up to the first occurence of a literal character.
In this case, that allows the expression to isolate the domain (group 3) and
subdomain (group 2) and protocol (group 1).
The remainder of the URL is matched on anything leading up to a quotation mark
(this only works because of the rules for XMl syntax, which in these cases
require that the URLs are surrounded by quotation marks since they are
encoded as attributes of various tags.)

## Resources

* [Initial lab questions]({% post_url 2025-08-29-lab-1-regex %})
* [Accompanying slides]({{ page.lab-slides }})

[regex-example]: https://lccn.loc.gov/2016959361/marcxml
